Task: Ndaversis - Agentic Semantic Version Info System
Create an automated semantic versioning management and README documentation generation system using AI and an agentic development approach.

Block 1: Infrastructure
Requirements:

Docker Compose with one service:
ndaversis — Python application with CLI and GUI
Support for running both in a container and locally
Persistent state storage via volumes

Result:
docker-compose up --build
Application starts and is ready to work
GUI is available at http://localhost:8080

Block 2: Basic Functions
Automatic Codebase Analysis
On startup, the system scans the entire repository
Extracts metrics: lines of code, comments, spaces, tabs
Analyzes structure: classes, functions, imports, docstrings
Determines programming languages and their distribution

Semantic Versioning
Automatic determination of version type (major/minor/patch)
Comparison of current and previous code state
Generation of detailed changelog with change metrics
Preserving version history in ndaversis_version_history.py

README Generation
Dynamic creation of all README.md sections
Automatic generation of diagrams in Mermaid syntax
Creating project, module, and dependency maps
Synchronizing documentation with the current code state

Block 3: AI Integration (Multi-Provider with Fallback)
Requirements:

Support for multiple AI providers with automatic switching
Primary provider: Gemini (default gemini-2.0-flash)
Fallback chain: Groq → OpenRouter → Mistral → DeepSeek → Qwen → Llama
Global rate limiter: maximum 4 requests per minute for the whole system
Configuring custom models via *_MODEL and optionally *_API_BASE
Handling "Insufficient Balance" errors with automatic transition to the next provider

Logic:
The system always takes the current state of the code and analyzes it
Requests AI to generate:
- Use Cases (usage scenarios)
- User Stories
- FAQ (frequently asked questions)
- Description of changes and their practical significance
- Suggestions for further development
If the provider returns text instead of JSON, the system handles the "raw response" without error
In the absence of AI keys, the system works in offline mode with synthesized content

Example configuration in config.json:
{
  "ai_providers": {
    "primary": "gemini",
    "fallback_chain": ["groq", "openrouter", "mistral", "deepseek", "qwen", "llama"],
    "rate_limit": {
      "max_requests": 4,
      "time_window_seconds": 60
    },
    "providers": {
      "gemini": {
        "model": "gemini-2.0-flash",
        "api_base": null
      },
      "groq": {
        "model": "mixtral-8x7b-32768",
        "api_base": null
      }
    }
  }
}

Block 4: GUI (PyQt6 Framework)
Requirements:

Modern graphical interface based on PyQt6
Support for desktop and web modes
Intuitive navigation with tabs

Functionality:
Main Tab:
- Choice of version type (Major/Minor/Patch)
- "Update Version & README" button
- Display of the current version
- Real-time operation logs

"Metrics Dashboard" Tab:
- Visualization of 15 repository assessment metrics
- Circular progress indicators for each metric
- Bar charts for comparative analysis
- Expandable sections with AI-generated summaries
- Button to export metrics in JSON/PDF

"Settings" Tab:
- AI provider configuration
- Rate limiting setup
- Choice of operating mode (online/offline)

Block 5: Own Feature - Repository Evaluation Metrics
Implement a comprehensive repository assessment system as a product for stakeholders.

What the feature does:
Analyzes the repository according to 15 key parameters
Each metric is evaluated in percentage (0-100%)
A short AI summary is generated for each metric
Results are visualized in the GUI with graphs and charts

Evaluation Metrics:

1. Code Quality
   - Docstrings coverage
   - Use of type hints
   - Code complexity (cyclomatic complexity)

2. Code Size
   - Number of lines of code
   - Module size distribution
   - Code/comments ratio

3. Security
   - Absence of hardcoded secrets
   - Use of secure patterns
   - Input data validation

4. Applicability
   - Breadth of use cases
   - Configuration flexibility
   - Target audience

5. Platform Compatibility
   - Cross-platform support
   - OS dependencies
   - Portability

6. Quantity
   - Number of functions/classes
   - Functional volume
   - API completeness

7. Performance
   - Algorithmic complexity
   - Absence of bottlenecks
   - Resource optimization

8. Usability
   - API clarity
   - Documentation quality
   - Presence of examples

9. Reliability
   - Error handling
   - Test coverage
   - Failure resistance

10. Innovation
    - Unique features
    - Modern practices
    - Innovative solutions

11. Simplicity
    - Code complexity
    - Architectural clarity
    - Minimalism of design

12. Aesthetics
    - Code style
    - Naming conventions
    - Formatting consistency

13. Duration (Maintainability)
    - Long-term maintainability
    - Technical debt
    - Readiness for development

14. Accuracy
    - Correctness of implementation
    - Compliance with specifications
    - Absence of bugs

15. Completeness
    - Fullness of functionality
    - Number of TODOs
    - Readiness for production

Why this is needed:
Provides an objective assessment of repository quality
Helps stakeholders make decisions
Identifies weak spots for improvement
Tracks project development progress

How to use:
CLI: python ndaversis.py --metrics
GUI: "Metrics Dashboard" tab → "Calculate Metrics" button
Result is saved in ndaversis_metrics.json

Block 6: Tests
Write unit tests using pytest.

Requirements:
The command python -m pytest tests_ndaversis/ -v runs the tests
Minimum 10-15 tests
Tests must work without real AI APIs (mock dependencies)

Coverage:
Versioning tests (increment_major, increment_minor, increment_patch)
Code analysis tests (_analyze_codebase, _process_python_file)
Diff generation tests (_generate_diff, generate_change_summary)
AI fallback system tests (rate limiting, provider switching)
Metric calculation tests (all 15 metrics)
GUI component tests (Flet mocking)

Block 7: Documentation
README.md should include:

1. Project Description
   What Ndaversis does
   Main possibilities

2. Installation and Launch
   Local installation
   Docker deployment
   Integration with an existing project

3. Configuration
   AI provider setup
   config.json examples
   Environment variables

4. Usage
   CLI commands
   GUI interface
   Git pre-commit hook

5. Architecture
   Project structure
   Used technologies
   Diagrams (Mermaid)

6. Metrics System
   Description of all 15 metrics
   How to interpret results
   Examples of use

7. Decisions Made
   Why PyQt6 was chosen for the GUI
   Why multi-provider fallback
   Why these specific metrics

8. Testing
   How to run tests
   Code coverage

9. Contacts and License

Block 8: AI Usage (Mandatory Section)
What AI tools were used:
Google Gemini API - primary provider for content generation
Groq, OpenRouter, Mistral, DeepSeek, Qwen, Llama - fallback providers
Claude/ChatGPT - for code development and debugging (optional)

For which tasks AI helped the most:
Generation of Use Cases and User Stories based on code analysis
Creating change descriptions with practical value
Synthesis of FAQ and How-To sections
Generating summaries for repository evaluation metrics
Suggestions for further development of the project

Where the generated code had to be finalized:
Fine-tuning prompts for structured output
Handling edge cases in parsing AI responses
Optimizing rate limiting to avoid quota exhaustion
Integration of fallback logic between providers
Customization of GUI components for specific metrics

Approximate estimation: how much time AI saved:
Basic structure development: ~8 hours
Documentation generation: ~12 hours
Test creation: ~6 hours
Debugging and refactoring: ~4 hours
Total: ~30 hours saved

Technical requirements
Mandatory:
Python 3.8+
PyQt6 (for GUI)
Multiple AI provider SDKs (google-generativeai, groq, openai, anthropic, etc.)
Docker and Docker Compose
pytest (for testing)
Type hints

What we look at
Mainly - whether the project works:
Run docker-compose up, check GUI accessibility
Run python ndaversis.py cli --patch, check version update
Check README generation with up-to-date data
Test Metrics Dashboard in the GUI
Check fallback between AI providers

Next we look at:
Completeness - whether all task blocks are completed
Code - readability, structure, typing, absence of hardcode
README - especially the section about AI usage and Metrics System
Tests - coverage of critical functionality
Docker - configuration correctness and operability

Project long-term goals
1. Full automation of documentation and versioning
2. Integration with CI/CD pipelines
3. Support for multiple programming languages (not just Python)
4. Enhanced metrics analytics with trends over time
5. Exporting reports for stakeholders in various formats
6. Integration with project management systems (Jira, GitHub Projects)
7. Machine learning for predicting the optimal version type
8. Support for monorepos with independent module versioning
